---
title: "Solar Cycle 25"
tags: hf propagation solar
---

![Sunspots]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/Sunspots.jpg)

*An active sun*

When I got interested in HF radio, in the late 1970's and early
1980's, I remember a couple of things: One was how much of a struggle
it was for a young person like me (at the time) to afford the latest
and greatest HF receivers, although I did try pretty hard and did
reasonably well, ending up with a Drake R7A and an Icom IC-R70 that
were both fairly superlative.

There was a lot more activity on the HF bands back then, and I recall
hearing a lot more too, because there was frequently excellent
propagation too, thanks to the levels of solar activity.

In the intervening 40 years, we'd gone through another three or four
solar cycles that were pretty disappointing. I've read a number of
[articles](https://astronomy.com/magazine/2019/08/why-has-the-sun-gone-quiet)
by perplexed solar physicists and astronomers who said that they could
not explain why the sun had become so uncharacteristically quiet.

Now we are in the early stages of solar cycle 25, and it looks as
though the drought has finally broken. I have been hearing signals on
10M, for example, that I haven't heard since the early 1980s.

There are a number of 10M FM repeater outputs just above 29.600 MHz;
on one at 29.640, which is located near Toronto, Canada, I heard a QSO
between a station in the Canary Islands and a station in downtown
Tokyo.  I find that impressive, and it typically doesn't happen unless
the [sunspot
number](https://spaceweather.com/glossary/sunspotnumber.html) is over
200.

![SurfingSunspots]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/SolarCycle25.png)
*Finally, the sun has come back to life*




